Design of protein structure comparison algorithm is an important research
issue, having far reaching implications. In this article, we describe a
protein structure comparison scheme, which is capable of detecting correct
alignments even in difficult cases, e.g. non-topological similarities. The
proposed method computes protein structure alignments by comparing, small
substructures, called neighborhoods. Two different types of neighborhoods,
sequence and structure, are defined, and two algorithms arising out of the
scheme are detailed. A new method for computing equivalences having
non-topological similarities from pairwise similarity score is described. A
novel and fast technique for comparing sequence neighborhoods is also
developed.
The experimental results show that the current programs show better
performance on Fischer and Novotny's benchmark datasets, than state of the
art programs, e.g. DALI, CE and SSM. Our programs were also found to
calculate correct alignments for proteins with huge amount of indels and
internal repeats. Finally, the sequence neighborhood based program was used
in extensive fold and non-topological similarity detection experiments. The
accuracy of the fold detection experiments with the new measure of
similarity was found to be similar or better than that of the standard
algorithm CE.
A new scheme, resulting in two algorithms, have been developed, implemented
and tested. The programs developed are accessible at
http://mllab.csa.iisc.ernet.in/mp2/runprog.html.
