Freestanding polycrystalline diamond (PCD) coatings are of immense
technological importance. PCD has been grown over silicon substrates by
microwave plasma assisted chemical vapor deposition (MWPACVD) process. The
coatings are grown by suitable optimisation of the growth parameters of a
915 MHz microwave reactor. Thereafter, 1:1:1 solution of hydrofluoric acid
(HF), nitric acid (HNO 3) and acetic acid (CH 3 COOH) is used to etch out
the silicon wafer from the backside of the coating. Hereby, freshly
generated nucleation surface, could be characterised by scanning electron
microscopy (SEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), Raman spectroscopy and
stylus profilometer and could be compared with the growth side. It is found
that both the nucleation side and growth side are of very high quality (full
width at half maxima, i.e., FWHM < 8 cm -1). The growth side is (111)
textured, whereas, the nucleation side is very smooth with embedded
detonation-nano-diamond (DND) agglomerates. These freestanding coatings are
successfully laser cut into different geometrical shapes. They are found to
be optically translucent having high refractive index. Cross-sectional
microscopy of the laser cut edge reveals novel melting features of the CVD
grown diamond columns. Free-standing diamond films over large area are
technologically very important for many applications due to their unique
mechanical, optical, electrical and thermal properties. These free-standing
films, either in plate form or in foil form, have to be smooth, and
chemically clean with low residual stress and considerable thickness
uniformity 1-6 . They can be brazed to a supporting frame or may be free
standing as per the end applications, like Gyrotron windows, supporting rods
for helix transmission wave tubes (TWTs), x-ray optics, thermal management
etc. (Table 1) 7-9 . The thicknesses of these free standing films may vary
from few nanometres to few millimetres, depending on the end use and can be
up to 300 mm in diameter. Synthesis of Freestanding Diamond Presently, the
most sought after method to prepare free-standing diamond film is the
microwave plasma chemical vapor deposition (MPCVD) technique. Diamond films
are deposited on carbide-forming substrates like Si, Mo, and Ta by MPCVD.
Now to make the deposited coating freestanding, films are to be separated
from the substrate by chemical etching or mechanical peeling 1-6,10 . Fan et
al. 10 deposited PCD by two-step microwave plasma CVD process on copper
substrates to overcome film cracking due to thermal mismatch between the
substrate and the film. The coating naturally peeled off during first step
of cooling down from higher temperature, thus delaminating the PCD film,
over which, further crack-free PCD growth occurs in the subsequent step.
Further, the authors characterised both the growth side and the nucleation
side of such freestanding films. Lee et al. 11 also adopted similar
principle of multiple-step CVD growth. They decreased the growth temperature
by 10Â°C each after 24 h and had thermal gradient cooling after completion of
deposition and thereby avoided growth cracks in the freestanding films 11-13
