The aim of this manuscript is to study a performance of quantum wire
infrared photodetectors (QRIPs) in the case of impinging by infrared (IR)
radiations. Photocurrent will be induced as a result of these IR radiations.
Although the analytical solution of the QRIPs is not trivial work, exact
solutions are obtained for each of photocurrent and its corresponding
figure-of-merit, responsivity. The main concern is to discuss the influence
of QRIPs parameters on the characteristics of photocurrent. The QRIPs
parameters are average quantum wire density, the transverse and lateral
size, operating temperature, and the number of quantum wire layers.
Moreover, comparison study with the quantum well (dot) infrared
photodetectors (QWIPs and QDIPs, respectively) is discussed. From the
numerical results, one can notice that the QRIPs give gradually increasing
photocurrent. While in another case, QDIPS, illustrates rapidly increasing
values of the photocurrent within all the period of photocurrent. Although
the photocurrent is smaller than its analogous QDIPs at the initial values
of biasing voltage, the QRIPs photocurrent is controllable and more
sensitive to the changing of device parameters. The main strength of the
QRIPs is that the induced photocurrent is larger than dark current by a
factor ranged from more than thousands, at low temperature, to ten at high
temperature. So, the derived QRIPs responsivity gives actual value of the IR
sensitivity. By utilizing QRIPs array, the obtained responsivity will be
suitable for IR detections.
