The present study examined the development of anticipatory motor planning in
an object manipulation task that has been used to successfully demonstrate
motor planning in non-human primates (Weiss et al. in Psychol Sci
18:1063-1068, 2007). Seventy-five participants from four different age
groups participated in a cup-manipulation task. One group was preschool
children (average age of 5.1 years), two groups were primary school children
(7.7 and 9.8 years old respectively) and the final group was comprised of
adults. The experimental task entailed reaching for a plastic cup that was
vertically suspended in an apparatus in either upright or inverted
orientation, removing the cup by its stem and then retrieving a small toy
from the inside of the cup. When the cup was inverted in the apparatus,
evidence for anticipatory motor planning could be achieved by initially
gripping the stem using an inverted (thumb-down) grip posture. We found that
when the cup was in upright orientation, all participants reached for the
cup using an upright grip (i.e. thumb-up posture). However, when the cup was
inverted in the apparatus, only adults consistently used an inverted
grasping posture, though the percentage of inverted grips among participants
did increase with age. These results suggest a protracted development for
anticipatory motor planning abilities in children. Surprisingly, the
performance of adults on this task more closely resembles the performance of
several nonhuman primate species as opposed to children even at
approximately 10 years of age. We discuss how morphological constraints on
flexibility may help account for these findings.
