Makespan minimization on mm identical machines is a fundamental scheduling
problem. The goal is to assign a sequence of jobs, each specified by a
processing time, to parallel machines so as to minimize the maximum
completion time of any job. Deterministic online algorithms achieve a
competitive ratio of about 1.92. Due to this relatively high competitiveness
and the lack of progress in the area of randomized online strategies, recent
research has investigated scenarios where the online constraint is
relaxed.We study semi-online scheduling where at any time an online
scheduler knows the sum of the jobsâ€™ processing times. This problem
relaxation is well motivated by practical applications. The best known
semi-online algorithm achieves a competitive ratio of 1.6 (Cheng, Kellerer,
Kotov, 2005 [11]). The best known lower bound is equal to 1.565 (Angelelli,
Nagy, Speranza, Tuza, 2004 [3]).In this paper, we present two contributions
for semi-online scheduling. We develop an improved lower bound showing that
no deterministic semi-online algorithm can attain a competitive ratio
smaller than 1.585. This significantly reduces the gap between the previous
lower bound and the upper bound of 1.6. Second, we present a new semi-online
algorithm that is based on an approach different from that of previous
strategies. The algorithm is 1.75-competitive and hence does not achieve the
best possible competitiveness. However, our algorithm is extremely simple
and, unlike previous strategies, does not resort to job classes. The
algorithm is more in the spirit of online algorithms not using any extra
information. Hence our upper bound highlights the additional power of a
small piece of advice when provided to an online algorithm.
