A classic result of G.A. Dirac in graph theory asserts that for n⩾3 every
n-vertex graph with minimum degree at least n/2 contains a spanning
(so-called Hamilton) cycle. G.Y. Katona and H.A. Kierstead suggested a
possible extension of this result for k-uniform hypergraphs. There a
Hamilton cycle of an n-vertex hypergraph corresponds to an ordering of the
vertices such that every k consecutive (modulo n) vertices in the ordering
form an edge. Moreover, the minimum degree is the minimum (k−1)-degree, i.e.
the minimum number of edges containing a fixed set of k−1 vertices. V. Rödl,
A. Ruciński, and E. Szemerédi verified (approximately) the conjecture of
Katona and Kierstead and showed that every n-vertex, k-uniform hypergraph
with minimum (k−1)-degree (1/2+o(1))n contains such a tight Hamilton cycle.
We study the similar question for Hamilton ℓ-cycles. A Hamilton ℓ-cycle in
an n-vertex, k-uniform hypergraph (1⩽ℓ<k) is an ordering of the vertices and
an ordered subset of the edges such that each such edge corresponds to k
consecutive (modulo n) vertices and two consecutive edges intersect in
precisely ℓ vertices.We prove sufficient minimum (k−1)-degree conditions for
Hamilton ℓ-cycles if ℓ<k/2. In particular, we show that for every ℓ<k/2
every n-vertex, k-uniform hypergraph with minimum (k−1)-degree
(1/(2(k−ℓ))+o(1))n contains such a loose Hamilton ℓ-cycle. This degree
condition is approximately tight and was conjectured by D. Kühn and D.
Osthus (for ℓ=1), who verified it when k=3. Our proof is based on the
so-called weak regularity lemma for hypergraphs and follows the approach of
V. Rödl, A. Ruciński, and E. Szemerédi.
