Since the determination in 1981 of the sequence of the human mitochondrial
DNA (mtDNA) genome, the Cambridge Reference Sequence (CRS), has been used as
the reference sequence to annotate mtDNA in molecular anthropology, forensic
science and medical genetics. The CRS was eventually upgraded to the revised
version (rCRS) in 1999. This reference sequence is a convenient device for
recording mtDNA variation, although it has often been misunderstood as a
wild-type (WT) or consensus sequence by medical geneticists. Recently, there
has been a proposal to replace the rCRS with the so-called Reconstructed
Sapiens Reference Sequence (RSRS). Even if it had been estimated accurately,
the RSRS would be a cumbersome substitute for the rCRS, as the new proposal
fuses-and thus confuses-the two distinct concepts of ancestral lineage and
reference point for human mtDNA. Instead, we prefer to maintain the rCRS and
to report mtDNA profiles by employing the hitherto predominant circumfix
style. Tree diagrams could display mutations by using either the profile
notation (in conventional short forms where appropriate) or in a
root-upwards way with two suffixes indicating ancestral and derived
nucleotides. This would guard against misunderstandings about reporting
mtDNA variation. It is therefore neither necessary nor sensible to change
the present reference sequence, the rCRS, in any way. The proposed switch to
RSRS would inevitably lead to notational chaos, mistakes and
misinterpretations.
