Haplogrouping refers to the classification of (partial) mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) sequences into haplogroups using the current knowledge of the
worldwide mtDNA phylogeny. Haplogroup assignment of mtDNA control-region
sequences assists in the focused comparison with closely related complete
mtDNA sequences and thus serves two main goals in forensic genetics: first
is the a posteriori quality analysis of sequencing results and second is the
prediction of relevant coding-region sites for confirmation or further
refinement of haplogroup status. The latter may be important in forensic
casework where discrimination power needs to be as high as possible.
However, most articles published in forensic genetics perform haplogrouping
only in a rudimentary or incorrect way. The present study features PhyloTree
as the key tool for assigning control-region sequences to haplogroups and
elaborates on additional Web-based searches for finding near-matches with
complete mtDNA genomes in the databases. In contrast, none of the automated
haplogrouping tools available can yet compete with manual haplogrouping
using PhyloTree plus additional Web-based searches, especially when
confronted with artificial recombinants still present in forensic mtDNA
datasets. We review and classify the various attempts at haplogrouping by
using a multiplex approach or relying on automated haplogrouping.
Furthermore, we re-examine a few articles in forensic journals providing
mtDNA population data where appropriate haplogrouping following PhyloTree
immediately highlights several kinds of sequence errors.
