The total cost of an Earthquake Early Warning System (EEWS) can be
substantially decreased by using Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs), which are
inexpensive computer networks whose nodes communicate wirelessly using a
license-free spectrum in a self-organized manner. The Early Warning System
triggers on the small-amplitude, but fast P-wave in order to shutdown
critical infrastructures before the destructive, but slow S-waves arrive
only a few seconds later. It demands low-latency communications of high
robustness. Our shakeboard-based measurements show that already for the
slight shaking related to P-waves representative for strong (Mw >; 6) and
nearby (epicentral distance <; 40 km) earthquakes, the performance of the
wireless communications can be considerably affected at the very moment when
the Early Warning system is supposed to be used. We observed swift link
quality oscillations of up to 10 dB within only half a second caused by
multi-path interference and shadow fading. We propose a new alarming and
routing protocol in order to meet the challenges of swiftly changing link
qualities and low latency communications of high robustness as required by
EEWSs. Our protocol is based on the new paradigm of anypath routing and
optimized for the unique application of Earthquake Early Warning. Extensive
simulations are conducted using topologies realistic for user deployed
networks, i.e. with several bridges and articulation points. Our evaluation
yields good results for WSNs of up to 500 nodes. For networks of more sensor
nodes the results are acceptable but can still be improved.

