Acoustical tomographical reconstruction of the location and sizes of
spatially localized, random perturbation in a shallow-water oceanic
waveguides is developed for mid-range distances. As examples of such
perturbations, clouds of bubbles arising due to breaking wind waves and
shoals of fishes are discussed. The ray approximation is used for the
acoustical field description. The oceanic environment is presented as a
medium with a background of uniformly distributed volume and surface random
inhomogeneous fluctuations. Complex acoustical repetitive pulses are used as
the probing signal. The receiving system consists of an array of spatially
distributed hydrophones. The signals received from all hydrophones are
processed on the basis of a tomographic algorithm including matched-filter
processing in the spatial and frequency domains for reconstruction of the
random time-delay statistical moments (average value and dispersion), which
are descriptors of the observed random spatially localized inhomogeneity. As
a specific model of random perturbation, a three-dimensional Gaussian cloud
of fluctuations associated with parameters of a fish shoal is investigated.
A vertically distributed array of receivers and a directed source of
LFM-pulses are tested as the prototype of the tomographical system in a
shallow waveguide with typical hydrology. Computer simulations of the
tomographical reconstructions are conducted taking into account
investigation of the influence of the level of additive noise on the
accuracy of the reconstructed parameters.
