We performed a set of numerical experiments in order to better simulate the
circulation of Atlantic Water in the Arctic Ocean by employing a coupled
ice-ocean Arctic regional model. We found that the inflow of Atlantic Water
via Fram Strait is weak in the case of high viscosity and diffusivity
coefficients (1 . 108 cm2/s and 1 . 107 cm2/s) and creates an anticyclonic
circulation in the Eurasian basin. This flow increases significantly when
both coefficients are scaled down (to 1 . 107 cm2/s and 0.5 . 106 cm2/s) but
the current path is then unstable, and it becomes mostly anticyclonic after
about a decade of integration. A further reduction of these coefficients
leads to growing instabilities due to insufficient grid resolution.
Short-term integration of the model with doubled space resolution shows
better agreement with observations, but long-term calculation is still
restricted by simulation time. Alternatively, a lower resolution version of
this model benefits from parameterizations of subscale processes.
Incorporation of the Neptune parameterization of eddy-topography interaction
into the model intensifies the current steered by subsurface topography and
results in cyclonic circulation of the Atlantic Water in every subbasin and
in the whole Arctic region. In the absence of salinity restoring there was
strong salinity drift at the surface, resulting in a salinity increase in
the central Arctic by 3 units from 1960 to 2005. The Arctic freshwater
content is driven basically by year-to-year variations of convective mixing
involving more saline water from lower layers. After cooling and increasing
in salinity through brine rejection, the surface water becomes denser,
leading to even stronger convective mixing. One-dimensional model tests
showed how model performance could be improved by implementing a lower
vertical diffusion coefficient and higher vertical resolution.
