Multi-objective optimization (MOO) involves optimization problems with
multiple objectives. Generally, theose objectives is used to estimate very
different aspects of the solutions, and these aspects are often in conflict
with each other. MOO first gets a Pareto set, and then looks for both
commonality and systematic variations across the set. For the large-scale
data sets, heuristic search algorithms such as EA combined with MOO
techniques are ideal. Newly DNA microarray technology may study the
transcriptional response of a complete genome to different experimental
conditions and yield a lot of large-scale datasets. Biclustering technique
can simultaneously cluster rows and columns of a dataset, and hlep to
extract more accurate information from those datasets. Biclustering need
optimize several conflicting objectives, and can be solved with MOO methods.
As a heuristics-based optimization approach, the particle swarm optimization
(PSO) simulate the movements of a bird flock finding food. The shuffled
frog-leaping algorithm (SFL) is a population-based cooperative search
metaphor combining the benefits of the local search of PSO and the global
shuffled of information of the complex evolution technique. SFL is used to
solve the optimization problems of the large-scale datasets.
This paper integrates dynamic population strategy and shuffled frog-leaping
algorithm into biclustering of microarray data, and proposes a novel
multi-objective dynamic population shuffled frog-leaping biclustering
(MODPSFLB) algorithm to mine maximum bicluesters from microarray data.
Experimental results show that the proposed MODPSFLB algorithm can
effectively find significant biological structures in terms of related
biological processes, components and molecular functions.
The proposed MODPSFLB algorithm has good diversity and fast convergence of
Pareto solutions and will become a powerful systematic functional analysis
in genome research.
